README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# EpiCompare <a href = "https://skgallagher.github.io/EpiCompare/"><img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" alt="EpiCompare" width="120" /></a>

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Travis build
status](https://travis-ci.org/skgallagher/EpiCompare.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/skgallagher/EpiCompare)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/skgallagher/EpiCompare/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/skgallagher/EpiCompare)
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of `EpiCompare` is to provide the epidemiology community with
easy-to-use tools to encourage comparing and assessing epidemics and
epidemiology models in a time-free manner. All tools attempt to adhere
to `tidyverse`/`ggplot2` style to enhance easy of use.

Time free analysis allows for stronger comparison of epidemics and model
based simulations avoiding different scaling and shifts of time that
mess up time-based comparisons.

To achieve this goal, the package contains:

  - **Visualization tools** to visualize SIR epidemics and simulations
    from SIR models in a time-free manner using `ggtern`’s ternary plots
    and prediction bands. For agent-based SIR models we also provide
    visualization tools to let the user easily explore how different
    characteristics of the agents relate to different experiences in the
    epidemic.
  - General **comparison tools** to compare epidemics and epidemic
    models that have higher numbers of states (again in a time-free
    manner), allowing for the user to examine the differences between
    models through simulations, and if an epidemic is similar to a model
    through simulations and prediction bands.
  - **Conversion tools** to:
      - Convert and then compare models from *standard epidemic
        packages* like `EpiModels`, `pomp`, as well as internal
        agent-based models, and epidemics in a common framework.
      - Convert *agent-based information into aggregate* to compare in
        the aggregate framework described above.

## Installation

You can install the developmental version of EpiCompare from github
using:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("skgallagher/EpiCompare")
```

## Data

Description of data including in this package can be found in the data
section of the
[reference](https://skgallagher.github.io/EpiCompare/reference/index.html#section-data)
page of the documentation website.

## Example

``` r
library(tidyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(dplyr)
library(ggtern)
library(EpiCompare)
```

The following example comes from a Measles outbreak in Hagelloch,
Germany in 1861. We have data on each child (agent) in the town.

``` r
hagelloch_raw %>%
  ggplot(aes(y = tI, z = tR)) +
    geom_aggregate() + 
    coord_tern() +
    labs(x = "S", y = "I", z = "R", title = "Town Analysis") +
    theme_sir()
#> Coordinate system already present. Adding new coordinate system, which will replace the existing one.
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-5-1.png" width="100%" />

Previous work has suggested that the class (`CL`) the student was in
effected how the experienced the outbreak. The below figure shows
differences in the outbreak relative to this grouping.

``` r
hagelloch_raw %>% 
  rename(`school grade` = CL) %>%
  group_by(`school grade`) %>%
  summarize(`number of students` = n())
#> # A tibble: 3 x 2
#>   `school grade` `number of students`
#>   <fct>                         <int>
#> 1 preschool                        90
#> 2 1st class                        30
#> 3 2nd class                        68

hagelloch_raw %>%
   ggplot(aes(y = tI, z = tR, color = CL)) +
       geom_aggregate() + 
       coord_tern() +
       labs(x = "S", y = "I", z = "R",
            color = "School Grade",
            title = "Town analysis by grade") +
       theme_sir()
#> Coordinate system already present. Adding new coordinate system, which will replace the existing one.
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-6-1.png" width="100%" />

### Simulate SIR data

``` r
n_sims <- 100
n_time_steps <- 100
beta <- .1
gamma <- .03
init_SIR <- c(950, 50, 0)
    
out <- simulate_SIR_agents(n_sims = n_sims,
                           n_time_steps = n_time_steps,
                           beta = beta, gamma = gamma,
                           init_SIR = init_SIR)
                                 
df_groups <- out %>% dplyr::group_by(sim) %>%
    agents_to_aggregate(states = c(tI, tR)) %>%
    rename(S = X0, I = X1, R = X2)
  
df_groups %>% ggplot() +
    geom_prediction_band(aes(x = S, y = I, z = R, sim_group = as.numeric(sim)),
                         alpha = .2, fill = "blue", color = "blue") +
    geom_line(aes(x = S, y = I, z = R, group = sim), alpha = .1) +
    coord_tern() +
    theme_sir()
#> Warning: Ignoring unknown aesthetics: z
#> Coordinate system already present. Adding new coordinate system, which will replace the existing one.
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-7-1.png" width="100%" />

## Package Creation Notes:

1.  For writing code that works with `tidyverse` 1.0 vs `tidyverse` \<=
    0.8.3. We followed ideas found in [tidyr:
    in-packages](https://tidyr.tidyverse.org/articles/in-packages.html),
    for the code, and - when working with Travis CI (using a matrix for
    multiple builds) - we leverage ideas in [tidyverse travis on
    github](https://github.com/tidyverse/design/issues/95) and
    [tidyverse
    principles](https://principles.tidyverse.org/changes-multivers.html).
2.  For writing your own `geom`s and `stat`s that works with `ggtern`
    (which are generally restricted), the following 2 stack-exchange
    articles helped use do so with ease:
    1.  [stack-exchange: personal code
        idea](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57175114/ternary-plot-scaling-opacity-across-groups)
    
    2.  [stack-exchange: being able to access ggtern’s element write
        away](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/31589479/how-to-fix-no-item-called-packagepkg-on-the-search-list-without-using-libra#comment51172891_31589479)
    
    3.  Finally, we’ve also leveraged ideas from [R-devel: on avoiding
        problems with
        `:::`](https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-devel/2013-August/067210.html)
        in `R/aaa.R` to overcome messages from CRAN relative to this
        hack (using `:::`). For some reason - when documenting for
        `pkgdown` website, we need to do `library(ggtern);
        EpiCompare:::update_approved_layers()`
3.  `geom_prediction_band` required not just `compute_group` but
    `compute_layer` - there is very little documentation on how to
    approach this correctly. Basically - there are problems when the
    `compute_group` wants to make multiple `pieces`/`groups` - and it is
    similar to the problem that if you do something like `aes(color =
    var1, group = var2)` you may actually want to do `aes(color = var1,
    group = paste(var1, var2))`, if there are the same `var2` values
    across different `var1` values but they don’t mean they should be
    grouped together.
4.  Now that `R` have come out with version \>= 4.0.0, we now need to
    call `.S3method("method", "class")` to define the connection for
    `S3` methods (e.g. `method.class` function), which we have for the
    `contained` function.

## Contributors

  - Shannon Gallagher ([`skgallagher`](https://github.com/skgallagher))
  - Benjamin LeRoy ([`benjaminleroy`](https://github.com/benjaminleroy))

Commit message:

ggplot2 and ggtern over-wrote with Epicompare:::print.ggplot

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# EpiCompare <a href = "https://skgallagher.github.io/EpiCompare/"><img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" alt="EpiCompare" width="120" /></a>

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Travis build
status](https://travis-ci.org/skgallagher/EpiCompare.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/skgallagher/EpiCompare)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/skgallagher/EpiCompare/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/skgallagher/EpiCompare)
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of `EpiCompare` is to provide the epidemiology community with
easy-to-use tools to encourage comparing and assessing epidemics and
epidemiology models in a time-free manner. All tools attempt to adhere
to `tidyverse`/`ggplot2` style to enhance easy of use.

Time free analysis allows for stronger comparison of epidemics and model
based simulations avoiding different scaling and shifts of time that
mess up time-based comparisons.

To achieve this goal, the package contains:

  - **Visualization tools** to visualize SIR epidemics and simulations
    from SIR models in a time-free manner using `ggtern`’s ternary plots
    and prediction bands. For agent-based SIR models we also provide
    visualization tools to let the user easily explore how different
    characteristics of the agents relate to different experiences in the
    epidemic.
  - General **comparison tools** to compare epidemics and epidemic
    models that have higher numbers of states (again in a time-free
    manner), allowing for the user to examine the differences between
    models through simulations, and if an epidemic is similar to a model
    through simulations and prediction bands.
  - **Conversion tools** to:
      - Convert and then compare models from *standard epidemic
        packages* like `EpiModels`, `pomp`, as well as internal
        agent-based models, and epidemics in a common framework.
      - Convert *agent-based information into aggregate* to compare in
        the aggregate framework described above.

## Installation

You can install the developmental version of EpiCompare from github
using:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("skgallagher/EpiCompare")
```

## Data

Description of data including in this package can be found in the data
section of the
[reference](https://skgallagher.github.io/EpiCompare/reference/index.html#section-data)
page of the documentation website.

## Example

``` r
library(tidyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(dplyr)
library(ggtern)
library(EpiCompare)
```

The following example comes from a Measles outbreak in Hagelloch,
Germany in 1861. We have data on each child (agent) in the town.

``` r
hagelloch_raw %>%
  ggplot(aes(y = tI, z = tR)) +
    geom_aggregate() + 
    coord_tern() +
    labs(x = "S", y = "I", z = "R", title = "Town Analysis") +
    theme_sir()
#> Coordinate system already present. Adding new coordinate system, which will replace the existing one.
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-5-1.png" width="100%" />

Previous work has suggested that the class (`CL`) the student was in
effected how the experienced the outbreak. The below figure shows
differences in the outbreak relative to this grouping.

``` r
hagelloch_raw %>% 
  rename(`school grade` = CL) %>%
  group_by(`school grade`) %>%
  summarize(`number of students` = n())
#> `summarise()` ungrouping output (override with `.groups` argument)
#> # A tibble: 3 x 2
#>   `school grade` `number of students`
#>   <fct>                         <int>
#> 1 preschool                        90
#> 2 1st class                        30
#> 3 2nd class                        68

hagelloch_raw %>%
   ggplot(aes(y = tI, z = tR, color = CL)) +
       geom_aggregate() + 
       coord_tern() +
       labs(x = "S", y = "I", z = "R",
            color = "School Grade",
            title = "Town analysis by grade") +
       theme_sir()
#> Coordinate system already present. Adding new coordinate system, which will replace the existing one.
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-6-1.png" width="100%" />

### Simulate SIR data

``` r
n_sims <- 100
n_time_steps <- 100
beta <- .1
gamma <- .03
init_SIR <- c(950, 50, 0)
    
out <- simulate_SIR_agents(n_sims = n_sims,
                           n_time_steps = n_time_steps,
                           beta = beta, gamma = gamma,
                           init_SIR = init_SIR)
                                 
df_groups <- out %>% dplyr::group_by(sim) %>%
    agents_to_aggregate(states = c(tI, tR)) %>%
    rename(S = X0, I = X1, R = X2)
  
df_groups %>% ggplot() +
    geom_prediction_band(aes(x = S, y = I, z = R, sim_group = as.numeric(sim)),
                         alpha = .2, fill = "blue", color = "blue") +
    geom_line(aes(x = S, y = I, z = R, group = sim), alpha = .1) +
    coord_tern() +
    theme_sir()
#> Warning: Ignoring unknown aesthetics: z
#> Coordinate system already present. Adding new coordinate system, which will replace the existing one.
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-7-1.png" width="100%" />

## Package Creation Notes:

1.  For writing code that works with `tidyverse` 1.0 vs `tidyverse` \<=
    0.8.3. We followed ideas found in [tidyr:
    in-packages](https://tidyr.tidyverse.org/articles/in-packages.html),
    for the code, and - when working with Travis CI (using a matrix for
    multiple builds) - we leverage ideas in [tidyverse travis on
    github](https://github.com/tidyverse/design/issues/95) and
    [tidyverse
    principles](https://principles.tidyverse.org/changes-multivers.html).
2.  For writing your own `geom`s and `stat`s that works with `ggtern`
    (which are generally restricted), the following 2 stack-exchange
    articles helped use do so with ease:
    1.  [stack-exchange: personal code
        idea](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57175114/ternary-plot-scaling-opacity-across-groups)
    
    2.  [stack-exchange: being able to access ggtern’s element write
        away](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/31589479/how-to-fix-no-item-called-packagepkg-on-the-search-list-without-using-libra#comment51172891_31589479)
    
    3.  Finally, we’ve also leveraged ideas from [R-devel: on avoiding
        problems with
        `:::`](https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-devel/2013-August/067210.html)
        in `R/aaa.R` to overcome messages from CRAN relative to this
        hack (using `:::`). For some reason - when documenting for
        `pkgdown` website, we need to do `library(ggtern);
        EpiCompare:::update_approved_layers()`
3.  `geom_prediction_band` required not just `compute_group` but
    `compute_layer` - there is very little documentation on how to
    approach this correctly. Basically - there are problems when the
    `compute_group` wants to make multiple `pieces`/`groups` - and it is
    similar to the problem that if you do something like `aes(color =
    var1, group = var2)` you may actually want to do `aes(color = var1,
    group = paste(var1, var2))`, if there are the same `var2` values
    across different `var1` values but they don’t mean they should be
    grouped together.
4.  Now that `R` have come out with version \>= 4.0.0, we now need to
    call `.S3method("method", "class")` to define the connection for
    `S3` methods (e.g. `method.class` function), which we have for the
    `contained` function.
5.  **Does 2 wrongs make a right?** As of 9/23 `ggtern` had an
    [issue](https://bitbucket.org/nicholasehamilton/ggtern/issues/13/ggtern-breaks-ggplots-plot)
    that it messed with `ggplot2`’s legends when loaded (it over-wrote
    the `print.ggplot` and other functions). To “correct” this, we’ve
    over-wrote `ggtern`’s `print.ggplot` to correct this problem when
    not producing ternary plots (code in `aaa.R`).

## Contributors

  - Shannon Gallagher ([`skgallagher`](https://github.com/skgallagher))
  - Benjamin LeRoy ([`benjaminleroy`](https://github.com/benjaminleroy))
